Good afternoon, everyone.
welcome back if you can see the treasures of the library um
Thank you again to this morning's speaker.
We're hoping that this panel this afternoon will be able to pick up that conversation, keep it equally honest and lively.
Just to give you a sense of the format, this is moderated only in the sense that questions will be thrown out by me for now.
And as the conversation continues, we will be able to open up for questions towards the end.
We're going to go until 3.30, where we're ready for coffee.
You'll dutifully come back 15 minutes later.
And we'll close up with the morning speakers at the table.
I'm open for questions and summaries.
We heard much this morning that we could all learn from, phrases that stick in our minds,
the differences between caretaking and stewardship, film references, references to anthropology, whole notion and vocabulary of how we can approach this interesting and dynamic relationship between librarians and collectors and dealers.
To my left this afternoon, I have a panel of individuals who each represent an aspect of this equation.
I'm going to only briefly introduce them because we've asked each of them to speak for a few minutes to talk about their relationship to this subject, their experience, what they might be able to bring to the conversation that we've had this morning.
And by way of that, we'll introduce themselves further in terms of talking about their own background.
To the left of me is Selby Kuyper, Senior Vice President for Books and Manuscripts at Sotheby's New York.
For most of you, the face of recent sales at Sotheby's on Book TV.
Recovered from a youthful indiscretion of reading Book Tarkington and has moved on to American history expertise at Sotheby's and is well known to many others.
Next to him, Edmund Lincoln from New York, a very considerate and precise collector by day, investment banker by night, a collector of books about architecture, decorative arts, and a very significant collection of library and collection catalogs.
Next to him, Marilee Taylor,
uh university librarian brown university uh at heart a special collections librarian always good friends in special collections both at her institution and also nationally has been very active in
perpetuating and promoting the notion of special collections to other university library administrators, but also participates as an instructor in advanced courses of rare books and special collections librarianship, and certainly a friend to librarians in this room.
Next to her, John Warnock, who could wear many hats at this table, but the one he's wearing today is a book collector.
who came by way of his book collecting drew an interest in science and technology, which has a lot to do with the fact that he just recently announced that he is now the former CEO of WU and the individual behind Octavo Institute of Books.
and a distinguished collector whose own collection he's making available slowly but surely through Octavo Books.
Just as an aside before I turn this over to the panel, this is in the spirit of this morning's conversation where it doesn't hurt to ask
You don't get what you don't ask for.
But also, I would add a spin to that, which is you must be careful how you ask for it.
John was recently visiting the Library of Congress.
We took the opportunity to pull out a variety of materials from the Rare Book and Special Collections Division collections.
in part to show off, in part to play the game of whose copy is better.
And in the process of doing that, I had bemoaned the fact that the Library of Congress lacked a copy of Galileo Sidereus Numidius.
Sorry, Messenger, which of course I knew.
John Warnock owned.
It was a very touching conversation.
Today, I'm very pleased to say that I was presented with a digital...
So, to the lessons that we've learned this morning, I would add, it all comes up what you're really asking for.
So, with all of that, I will turn it over to Selby to kick it off, and I'll just ask for you to pick up until we get finished.
I would hope that everyone here would be as willing as Bill Reese expressed to its own meaning for any impressions of my employer, so I'm not sure that would be the case for everyone here.
But I've been struck by the listed understanding, I think, of the topic today and the conversations this morning that there's a
conflict between what libraries want private collectors to do and what perhaps the trade of which I am one element, private dealers, some of the other elements, what they want them to do in their works.
I think that private collectors really can offer so much more and do offer so much more than simply a donation of their books.
It's what they do in identifying new topics for collecting and in building collections that lead to other collectors taking up the challenge of bibliographies and so forth and to think of just the
end result of their collecting being what the fruits of their labors are.
A little short-sighted.
Something else that perhaps by self-preservation, I have to believe in and disagree with something else that was said this morning.
the ultimate heiress material we firmly believe property keeps turning off either in traditional ways or that collectors identify new areas to collect them phil mentioned the dunlap broadside of the declaration of independence and
I thought, as I often have, that since the Library of Congress did its bicentennial census, five more copies of that, including probably three of the finest copies, have come to light.
The academic world has accepted completely that the
first half of the huckleberry min pardon me huckleberry finn manuscript was lost as you can imagine we get calls all of the time from people offering a scoop for a bible and declarations of independence and getting further addresses none of which turned out to be uh seldom turned out to be
what we think they are.
The colleague of mine was on the phone with a lady in California.
And he said, with just a moment, we call it over and tell me, where's the man who served the Buckleberry Finn at?
And I said, at the Buffalo Public Library.
and it goes back to this is usually a promotion that I yell over, but it's just the second half.
Well, the first half turned out to be rediscovered and is now the second half after talking to the public.
So I think that there will continue to be books available and that private collectors will be motivated by gathering them because they have the private collectors now.
information and information to offer as it goes simply beyond that I think
You know, I'm here really, I hope a modest witness to all the good things that Special Collections Library can do in terms of mentorship and access.
Bob Jackson said for the way you develop support.
i'm really here to talk a bit about the relationship i've had with i think a classical example of a certain example of a special collections library that is the winter tour museum outside wilmington delaware winter tour i hope is a place that many of you visited most of you visited i hope many of you know the collections and you all should if you don't and we're fortunate here to have very coolie who's the director of the library and his
related academic programs here today, Rich McKinstry, who's the manuscript librarian, so they will be happy to correct me if I make a statement and tell you, I'm sure, more about the institution.
But I'm looking for a library which serves a unique American museum country estate that I think most of us know as being unrivaled for its
study and collections of early American decorative arts and their British and continental origins.
In this respect, its only rivals our problem with DNA, Musee des Arts Decoratifs in Paris, and in certain areas, the Cooper Hewitt and the Metropolitan Museum.
But it's really much more than that.
It's a series of many other collections, if not just architectural furniture pattern books.
I mean, they're a superb collection of early American imprints, training catalogs, business records, inventories.
Manuscripts, gardening material, women's history collection, shaker imprints, goes on and on and on, I believe, of which are from estate management and scientific farming.
I had the great good fortune growing up outside of Wilmington and being interested in furniture and the decorative arts, being able to work in this library when I was in high school back in the mid-1960s, and getting to use some of the pattern books there, and then
Even better, when I got out of college from September of 71 to September of 72, having a main position really as an acting rare book librarian during a hiatus between two professional appointments,
um this is just wonderful it gave me a chance to learn about a hobby get paid for doing it getting to know a collection a collection in a very tactile intimate way there's a time when i could point out identify immediately every location of every rare book on the shelves you can do that if you have 25 or 30 40 000 titles uh reflections bigger today and i couldn't do it but it was really one of the great formative experiences of my life and
As a result of that, I have tried to support the library primarily through donations over a period now that would extend at least over 30 years.
And it's been a way of saying thank you over that period of three decades for the kindnesses and consideration that were shown to me by Frank Sommer, who was in the director, and to a lesser extent by Charlie Montgomery.
Charles Van Riemen's way, who were directors of the museum.
And these are people you don't forget.
And my own collecting interest, as Mark said, initially began to be focused on architecture and ornament and decoration with a little more of a continental orientation.
But what I've tried to do is to give the library gifts that really complement the collections they have.
uh in many cases these are not high spot books because um the library was buying in the early 50s from people like bassford where you could walk and just sweep the shelves there for the second world war before these pattern books became fashionable and so they have they have robert adams with contemporary coloring and they have you know the uh hamilton studies and things of this kind but um
Material that's filled in, for example, books in Middle European books written by Jesuits, priests on architecture, publishing prices like Vienna, Prague, and Trieste, which are all parts of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the second half of the 18th century.
These are the kind of things that are filled there.
Bibliography, some continental material.
And it's given me a lot of pleasure to do this, and I think it's been useful because
You know exactly who's going to be using the material.
There are no questions about hypothetical issues, but will it be appreciated?
Will it be used?
And there's also a very, very important conservation laboratory effort and post-master's degree program associated with winter tours.
Though things go wrong, they are able to
correct climate problems and damage and deterioration problems.
There's some expertise in the finding area.
So you feel very comfortable with putting very good hands.
And I would agree with Shelby.
I don't think that this material is, it's not impossibly scarce.
I've never, I've never
at any sort of period of time when there hasn't been more available than I can possibly afford to buy.
And I don't really see that changing.
I think the only area that really is becoming very difficult now is fine 16th century continental ornament, even more so than architectural books.
And that's really because so much of this has gotten in the hands of the print dealers.
And I hope there are no print dealers here, but they are the absolute antagonist of book collectors because when you start selling things by the page and pricing them like old by the sheet and pricing them like old master prints, you completely lose the frame of reference that most book collectors are constantly dealing in.
But there's at least one very important collection in this field that will come onto the market in the next five years.
So there will be opportunities to fill any gaps in that area.
The institution's role, I mean, I think in the case of Winter Tour, has been, as I said, being exemplary, and I think it's a model for what you would want to do.
I mean, you know, I had, even as a non-employee, I had access to the stack on a control base.
There was mentorship, there were
librarians who were collectors themselves.
They made introductions to me as a very young person with really no money to some of the prominent dealers on the continent and in England and in the United States, which enabled me to jumpstart my own activities probably by about 10 years.
The emphasized bibliography, I mean, no one gave me a set of standard bibliographies in my field, but I was told early on that I needed the Burlady catalog, I needed the full sale, I needed two or three other important catalogs, which I bought, and it's amazing what you can learn by reading bibliographies, and that's an interest that I've picked up in only in the last four or five years.
I think these models can work, and I've had some other relationships, the Press Library at Harvard's own involving one, and certainly the Houghton Library has been very rewarding in certain contexts, but I think the Winter Tour one is unique in my experience, but I think it's a model that particularly the smaller and highly focused library can probably develop, and I think it pays to cultivate
sort of identify your targets if you are a librarian, identify your candidates early on.
And I actually, the first time I met Bill Reese was in the fall of 1971.
And Bill didn't even have a driver's license.
And then he was a very nice parent and very nice sister.
And Bill was looking at the Audubon and the rest is history.
So thank you all for the chance.
Well, one of the reasons that I enjoy coming to programs like this is that it reminds one of the reasons that librarians do what they do and gives someone like myself a few moments to reflect back on how I feel about what we do and how we contribute to scholarships.
On the wall outside my office, I have a
list of the librarians at Brown University going back to the 1760s.
One of whom I might add was a gentleman by the name of Increase Sumner Smith.
That is an appropriate name for a librarian.
I don't know what is.
But I keep it there for two reasons.
One, of course, is to remind people who come into the office that
The position I hold is an old and distinguished one, and distinguished for good reason.
That is because it's important to the institution.
But also to remind myself that, and hopefully the folks who work in the library, that that library was there many years before we came.
It's the product of the hard work, not only of our predecessors, but of the passion and the devotion of collectors
such as we have here today, and we have it in our hands for really a fleeting moment in the history of that institution.
And it's our role, and it's certainly, I feel, my role to try to pass it on to those who come after us, hopefully in better shape than where I found it.
in every respect.
And it's not simply a position, it's an inheritance.
And it's something for us to lead through the future.
And I think when you talk about the role of special collections and research libraries, I think one of the things that we have to offer to collectors and where there's a real connection is that kind of shared passion
and commitment to the future of a vision that we're building on parents' paths and moving that forward for the generations long after us will benefit by it.
It's a more lasting way of keeping someone's work alive, I think, often than a building.
As someone who works often with donors,
or hear stories about donors to the university, there's great excitement often about having your name on a building.
But I think those of us who work in institutions and particularly old ones have also seen the buildings that are torn down or the buildings that change their name down the line.
And for that reason, I think I often say an endowment for books is a much longer lasting memorial in some cases to someone, certainly a collection that is given to an institution and will be built upon and used for many future generations as a great living legacy.
On my own role in all of this, I'm very honored to have Mark
sort of adopt me as a member of the rare book community.
This is a community with excessively high standards and the one which many library directors probably can't need.
But I think my role more than anything else is to find the resources and provide support.
So that the Special Collections people at Brown who have the knowledge of this field and the content expertise can go and do what they do and work with the donors.
My goal is to help to reassure the donors that if a collection comes to our institution, it will be cherished and taken care of and preserved.
And I think part of the role, and as mentioned earlier today, but perhaps not at great length, I think it's hard to underestimate the complexity today of the competition within institutions of higher education for funds.
And I mean, not only for the library to get funds when you are looking, for example, at pressure to compete in financial aid,
or at our institution providing support for graduate research, graduate fellowship.
All of these things are things where the library is competing on institutional levels of resources.
And then within the library, there is intense composition for the existing class.
And I think one of the things the director is always in the position of balancing is
how much of the available funds go to Special Collections versus the digital and versus other projects that are greatly cherished.
So I always urge when I'm talking to audiences where there are many people from Special Collections to put the time in to educate the library director as much as you can because there's someone for whom there's a great deal of competition for the support.
I want to agree with the comments that's been made by several people that I don't believe that the possibilities for collecting are drying up.
Scholarship is voracious.
It's moving into areas that when I was an undergraduate, no one would have believed that certain things would become for academic attention.
But to give you an example,
Not long ago, we were given a collection, and we're happy to be given a collection, of 60,000 comic books.
Now, the thing that amazed me about this was the press this got, because the carrying on in the press was much along the lines of, Ivy League University Library collects comic books.
What has the world come to?
Or this is quite an external thing.
Whereas I think we felt that comic books, aside from being an art form, are increasingly becoming important cultural studies.
They're increasingly being produced as serious works of literature, although they're illustrated.
And furthermore, and this is always an important issue for an academic institution, this collection fit in beautifully with other materials in our collection.
So we didn't consider it to be odd at all.
And neither is the gentleman who had built this fine collection and is still building it.
So I think where there is a variety of human interest, there is always going to be a variety of collecting.
And there's, at least I am not concerned about one day folks putting out things to collect and hopefully give to us.
In 1982, my partner and I, Chuck Yushke and I, founded Adobe Systems.
And when we founded Adobe, we had no concept that the company for the last 18 years would completely change the world of printing and publishing.
Almost every magazine, newspaper, book in the world today of modern presses
uses our technology, so our interest in the history of type and the interest of the history of printing has been always sort of part of the fabric of our professional life.
How I got into collecting, this is a funny story.
Our family was at the Grosvenor Housing and Teak Fair in 1987, and we were going back to buy the Nags food stall.
And my son came up to me and he said, Dad, look at this.
And there was this big book, and I pulled it off the shelf.
And it was a 1570 copy of Euclid's Elements that was first edition in English.
And if you open this book, it had these wonderful little pop-up figures of all the geometry of Euclid.
While I studied at its philosophy in college,
I said, oh my god.
I really never had realized that such books even existed, much less that you could buy them.
And so I looked at the price, and since Adobe had just gone public, I decided, well, this is nifty.
I really have to have this book.
So I took the book home.
and put it up on the shelf, and that was a mistake because if you put it up on the shelf, there it is, all by itself.
And you say to yourself, this book means friends.
And that starts this ongoing and all-consuming disease that lasts over many, many years because you find more and more friends to add to the community of books.
I would characterize my collection as a high point collection in science and mathematics and philosophy and economics.
And there aren't many books, but they're good books.
The other thing that occurred to me is when I started giving talks on these books, I used to take a couple of the books to go with the talks.
We talked about books without the books are sort of boring.
But when people see these first editions of Newton and Galileo, all of this emotion comes out of it.
I mean, my God, these are real seminal events in the history of mankind.
And so then I thought to myself, gee, wouldn't it be great if every high school kid could have access to all of this stuff?
and yet at the same time not destroy them in the process.
And so I mowed this around with a friend at work, and we decided to start Octavo with the express purpose of using the technology to photograph every page of the book and put them in electronic form and make them available in a very unknown price.
And so the disposition of my collection, the best disposition would be if all of my collection was available to everybody for a very nominal price.
The artifacts, as I completely agree with Bill Ries, they're icons.
There will be nothing like holding one of these things in your hand and knowing that you've got a piece of history.
But not everybody can do that.
And even special collections and libraries can't do that because they can't let everybody in.
It destroys the book over time.
But we're working very closely with the Folger Museum and the Library of Congress and Mark and Daniel have been great supporters and Richard from the Folger have been great supporters of trying to get these things in individual forms so that everybody can look at the type, look at the paper texture,
and get to look and feel with the folks.
Because I think the final outcome should be, all of these things should be made ultimately accessible.
So that's my goal of life.
And that's what the collection is all about.
Thanks very much.
Let's try getting to the, I think, the common thread of this morning.
We've heard it in a variety of ways.
I know it's certainly the topic that a lot of people are talking about after this morning.
Is it fair to say that when we look at collectors and librarians and the dealers who are often either the agents between us or for us, that we're at odds with each other?
This morning we heard various phrases that either suggested that collectors are no longer collecting what libraries need, that there are consistently mentioned or issues of trust,
a sense of security for the part of the collector, a sense of fear that their books would be abandoned.
We heard about the magnetic force of gifts to libraries and what they can do.
It's understood that we all share a spirit or a passion for book materials.
We've all been striving for the word today, Hindi, I think works pretty well.
But beyond that, are we at a point where collectors and librarians are describing a different passion?
It was suggested this morning that there's a difference between caretaking and stewardship, and is this the point in which collectors and librarians differ?
This comes from the spirit, certainly, of the librarian in which we would like collections to come to us, however that, whatever path that might be.
So, I'll throw that out and see if people have some response to it.
I guess, again, one speaks from one's experience.
It's been a pretty symbiotic and fairly happy trinity for me.
Again, as I said, I know where my books are going, and I'm not trying to make converts.
I'm trying to help build a collection or two that's already existing.
highly regarded in an area that is complementary to one that I am in.
And frankly, I think there's quite a bit that can be learned in terms of
libraries are cutting edge in terms of curatorial services and conservation.
And there's probably more I could benefit from in that regard.
And certainly the booksellers are, I agree with people who said that the booksellers are really the lubrication for a lot of what we do.
I don't know many other collectors in my field, and there may be some.
I'm sure there are a few of them around.
But dealers are really the ultimate of open-stacked libraries.
I mean, everything is for sale.
Almost everything is for sale.
And they let you come in, and they let you hold things.
And books are very tactile, particularly if you're interested in illustrated books and buying things, as I am.
So that works pretty well.
And some libraries, I think,
Some libraries, particularly large ones, do continue to be intimidating to someone on the outside and it takes a lot of time to penetrate physically into the libraries.
That's one area where I think the book trade is probably more accessible and frankly
know if if a dealer handled 50 copies of a book and charlie would probably seen 100 copies of most of the books that i would consider important in english architecture in the 17th 18th 19th century that that knowledge is you can't duplicate that as an individual so that's that's a great value i think to anyone who's collecting in a focused area but generally for me it's worked well so i had no no
I think that the dealer and collector relationship is essential.
You build a strong bond of trust to the dealer.
They know your taste and what kind of books you'll consider and what kind of books you won't consider.
For the most part, and you find out about the other ones, for the most part they're very, very ethical.
I've run across a couple that aren't, but that's rare, I think.
They have incredible knowledge, as you say, to seeing dozens of copies of books, and they try to represent the books fairly.
So I've used probably a dozen readers all over the world that I trust with, and they are the source.
I mean, they are the ones who rooted out auction houses lessons.
My own personal contact tends to be more with collectors than it does with dealers, but I would say that in the institutions I've worked in,
the relationship between libraries, dealers, and collectors has been overwhelmingly positive.
And dealers have been very helpful to the library in a number of ways.
And certainly, we at Brown have a number of long-term and very interested and involved collectors with whom we work.
Sometimes there can be frustrations on both sides.
I read an article some years ago, and I'm ashamed to say I cannot remember the author at this point, but essentially it was called bereavement and the collector.
And it made the analogy that when a collector makes a decision to sell or give a collection to an institution,
The collector often goes through the same stages of grief as you do when you lose someone who's very dear to you.
You have anger, grief, denial.
I don't remember all those things.
I think perhaps the more appropriate analogy is giving away your child in marriage.
You still have a decent investment.
this entity would not exist, it hasn't been for your position and hard work, but now you've got to sort of let go and let .
And I think it's important, communication is a very important part of it.
It's very important for institutions to make sure that the collector knows from the beginning that the institution may not have
exactly the same aims for that collection as the collector did.
In other words, if your collection is going to the institution of higher education, there's an interest in that institution in having a collection of scholarship and that the collection relates to materials you already have.
You may not develop the collection in the exact same way that the collector would have and he or she kept it under this control.
The more these things are discussed openly and comfortably, then I think the less you understand the frustration you have down the line.
The other thing I often think collectors may experience for the first time in working with an institution who has assigned their collection is the awesome ability to drive both parties to deal crazy.
From the point of view of the library, as I often tell our staff, the library does not exist alone as part of a larger bureaucracy.
It means that such issues as getting checks cut or getting papers signed in a seamless and smooth way that you might have with a transaction between two individuals.
We do the best we can to
make this easy for the collectors and the donors, but there are some types of pitches along the way.
In a general sense, I think of dealers as being colleagues of mine.
I'm not sure all dealers feel that same way about auction houses.
But I certainly think that dealers play a greater role in nurturing private collectors.
than an auction house can.
By the nature of our business, we're much more concerned, frankly, with sellers than with buyers.
We figure if we have something like a receiver in the library to sell, the buyers are going to come to it.
So it's hard for us sometimes to get to know collectors
in the same way as dealers do i think still this sense of intimidation about attending an auction i think occasionally dealers like to play up that presumption to keep private bidders out of the rooms
but more and more we're seeing private collectors participate on their own sometimes on the telephone so perhaps the demon doesn't know that they're doing something on their own rather than being in the room but
We play a role by bringing many books to the marketplace.
Just as dealers have stocks, it can be viewed at an exhibition at an auction house as an opportunity for people to see unbearable books.
The Siebert sale was really the first time those books had ever been seen by anyone in their entirety.
By anyone other than Dr. Siebert himself.
with the assumption that collections lead a life that ultimately end up in a library.
I know that may not be universally shared in the room, but let's start with that assumption.
What is it that librarians and dealers and collectors need to do to make them happen?
Or what is it that we're not doing that prevents that from happening?
I think, to some extent, libraries have to stop acting like they have to divide right.
Collectors work hard to get the books that
that they have they have a great deal invested in them not simply monetary they're proud of them and you know it's become a cliche to say you want other collectors to have a chance but in fact a very important collector just last week was saying to me if other people hadn't sold their books where would i have gotten my books and my books have been beside my family the principal pleasure of my life
So I think perhaps, you know, working on this sense of cooperation... Well, I...
How many entries, new entries, does the Library of Congress get per day?
30,000?
We're going to be on the copyright office.
Yes, right.
So, and I've made this point before, and I think some of you may have heard of the Library of Congress.
and i recall going in cardinals coming out i think the basic fear that i would have as a collector and i think any collector would have is that this thing collection is going to go in and die on the shelves and that was brought up earlier that this is a major fear that somehow this thing is going to get lost and never
you have the access to the collection that you would like.
So I think it's a major question.
I would ask you to see what you're going to do with it.
And what positively are you going to do with it to make either the materials accessible or bring the same joy to whoever went this season that I got out of it.
Could you expand on that in the sense that certainly from a librarian's perspective, one would say the opportunity for many more people
to discover this book would be present at the library as opposed to the private residence of a collector so could you talk a little bit more about what it would what you would need to hear from a library that would make you comfortable or assured that well it's sort of the same quandary that i had when i started the collection i felt this pain that i own these things that really should have much much broader appeal and so i sort of took it in my own hands to try to make them accessible independently
And I guess what I would like is the same kind of assurance that that kind of energy would be put into it, that I would put into it.
That's from a purely personal point of view.
I think this has been very much what I was saying before about two things that are struggling today in the conversation.
Bob Jackson's point about the need for libraries to reach out to collectors who may not know that we have an interest in what they're doing, particularly, again, if they're collecting in areas that they may not see as some serious scholarship or a serious interest in higher education.
But having the words done that, then I think having a discussion about why
you believe the collection belongs to the institution, what you will do with it, how you will, and I know this is not a popular word in our community, but I'll use it anyway, market the collection so that
There's a wide knowledge.
One of the things I think that has made a great difference in the use of special collections over the last 20 years has been the retrospective cataloging projects where there was a time when in order to use certain collections, someone had to know that this particular collection was at X University and covered a certain subject or period.
And even then, you couldn't count on the fact that the person who wanted to use it would know the types of materials were in that collection.
Now that many of these collections have been cataloged, what we're finding is people are coming upon a particular title that is an interest to them and they want to come and use and work with.
And they have no idea in the world that it was part of the Annex P. Brown military collection or part of a collection that was formed that was an interest in a particular subject.
They may not even be working in that particular subject area.
There's a good deal that libraries are doing now through these digitalization projects that is making materials available on the internet, but not with the idea that that use is going to replace or support the importance of the artifact, but that it will in fact bring people to the library to use those artifacts.
I think the worst thing a library can do in a sense
would be to accept the collection simply because of an iconic value and without any idea of why it fit into that institution, collecting the gold book house, the port of the mission, and simply salt it away on the shelves because it was nice to have.
And that indeed may have gone on in some places in the past, but I don't think it's today's vision of their book librarianship.
One thing I would add to that is that I came into the profession via the public services route, and I spent my first six or seven years on a circulation desk, which I occasionally refer to as the Russian front of the library.
There's no way a glamorous part of the exhibition.
And when I entered the profession, I think there was a view amongst some of those special collections people sat over in their ivory towers, exclaiming over their bindings and doing the best they could to keep everyone else from using the book.
And one of the things that I have...
pleasure of learning through the involvement i've had with the special license community that is far far from the case in this generation and probably one of the former generation either well i think if we can get over the hurdle of finding a library that is the right home and will take care of things and use them and promote them properly i think there's still a lot that libraries can do to tolerate donors and
Part of it is just kind of looking to your extended family or your museum.
You look to the people who use your collection, maybe who visit you.
If you want to collect books on furniture, the worst place to start might be
It wouldn't be the worst place to start to get to know some people who are in the manufacturing furniture business.
If you want to collect books on builders hardware, find someone that's in the hybrid builders hardware business.
You'd be surprised what kind of archives still exist.
They are disappearing, but they still exist.
Just to use two examples.
I think at the university level, particularly the smaller libraries, can be fairly creative.
I mean, when I was at Harvard Business School, Ken Carpenter, who was then the press librarian, did absolute wonders in terms of the PR of the press by having cool collector's groups.
such things that seem, you know, inconsequential as distributing out a scope catalog.
I mean, I can't tell you how many wonderful color plate catalogs I got from Freddie Schaub and all these William Schaub and all these fancy European dealers that there was no way I was going to be on their list.
They're in a little back closet of a pile that never diminished through week to week, month to month.
Anyone who wanted them can have them as a reference material.
People don't forget those kind of things.
So those are very simple things.
But I think it's like selling any other kind of service or product.
And here it's a very commendable thing.
Everyone should wear their marketing hat.
So if we can take it as understood that there is more to the relationship
between collectors and libraries, and as Bob pointed out this morning, the simple transfer of material.
Can we talk a bit more about what kind of relationship we should be developing, regardless of where those collections end up?
And certainly those of us who deal in rare books, who have public service operations, know full well that collectors often are users, that we learn as much from our collections from them as they do from us.
that there is in fact a community of books that are formed.
But I'm interested in hearing people talk about what it is that we could do as librarians, or conversely as collectors or dealers, to bring this community tighter together to focus on our interest collecting in general.
One thing that I think about is really from the perspective of the library, I think there are three areas
are very important to collectors.
One is curatorial and conservation services.
Clearly another is publication.
And a third area is deposit or storage.
Now, no one has any space anymore.
But those are, I think, the three desires of every collector who
doesn't probably have a curator, lives in New York, where it comes in, doesn't have a perfect environment, runs out of space, and on and on and on.
So there may be, in certain cases, very symbiotic kind of relationship to develop.
I think the people that I've seen build very personal relationships with collectors, that is the librarians, often it's building a real sense of collegiality and friendship in the sense that there's frequent contact, there's comfort on both sides with
touching base sometimes if someone has a question or a problem or wants to know what to do about a preservation problem.
We have one of our donors at the library who lives in the community and who is in and out constantly just on a friendly basis.
And sometimes we help her with one problem or another.
and uh i think having that kind of easy open relationship um where perhaps someone someone mentioned earlier this morning of culture building a collection with an awareness that it may come to the library and building it with the knowledge of what the library has
other thing that struck me is a wonderful idea and i don't recall the point who mentioned the the need for mentoring and for bringing collectors together the cultures are often looking for um people to talk to similar and i think that's something that perhaps
libraries don't do as much as they should.
And we have friends groups.
The friends groups really don't play that role.
And I'm thinking of something that would be much more, oh, I don't know, where people could actually sort of get together in circles and talk about their issues with collectors and perhaps, you know, some experts help curators if they were starting out, that kind of thing.
I think the analogy that you're giving up a member of your family when you give up the collection, you sort of really want to get to know
who you're giving up your kids to.
You know, and quite frankly over the last couple of years, the relationship that we've developed with Mark, the relationship that I've developed with the culture, they're seeming a lot more like family than they are, you know, strangers who are going to take your kids' improve license.
The other thing I would comment just related to that is that
i when i was a fledgling young thing and was an intern at yale um i followed the library director rogers to a um a very important uh conference that was held here at the library of congress to talk about what we should do about the national preservation problem and this was i think about 1975-76 and there was a great deal of um
almost despair at that point because it seemed like such an immense problem and something that how will we ever going to deal with it.
And it was really the leadership of the Library of Congress and the kind of catalyst role in play that got these
national cooperative preservation efforts together and also I think really focus the attention of the research library community on the preservation issue and as a consequence of that I think the dollars spent on preservation and conservation of materials has increased I'm happy to say Brown is not one of the libraries that story things in the process Michael Selman but
We just finished through an NIH challenge grant, raising over $3 million from preservation.
And there's a real commitment, I think, in most research libraries these days, to seeing that your children will not be utilized in our care.
And there's a great sensitivity to that.
I hadn't thought of storage, but my first thought was the other two points that Ed raised.
I really think exhibitions and catalogs are the two things that the three groups have most in common and take most enjoyment out of it.
Like the Royer Club, Eric Holzenberg is ready to revitalize their exhibition program that has gotten great press coverage and you suddenly feel that you aren't necessarily second fiddle to whatever art exhibition is up, that books are important and you can see is there a book there that you have?
Maybe next time you're going to loan to the book.
then there's a catalog of publications that gets into the trade and you start to cite it i think within about three months of bill's 19th century color plate book coming out we were citing it for the second fever sale as reference so that to me seems to be something that
Really, I realize that a lot of libraries do it, that more emphasis should be done on it.
It's a very public profile.
It makes everyone involved feel as though something tangible has been accomplished, which it has been.
And it adds real importance to what's going on.
I'm a little curious about the idea of getting collectors together.
I really wonder if that's a good idea.
I think dealers are often a pain to keep collectors apart.
They work very hard to keep collectors apart.
Maybe librarians should do that as well.
I think many collectors are very private.
They feel rivalries with someone else.
So I'm not sure that
getting together a group would be as effective as just trying to work one on one.
Depends on what she talks about.
Perhaps she could bring together people collected in different areas.
You know, you wouldn't bring all of the Shaw collectors together in one place.
When you do that, each person wants to talk about his or her collection.
It's the rarest, like a parallel line that never enters back.
Well, if we ever tried it, I'll deport that.
As far as shot collectors, this is completely off the track.
Talking about the scarcity of material we had to sale a few years ago from an old man in Dayton, Ohio, who collected a long time with most of his dealers.
Pre-deceased him, no one knew much about the collection.
It was actually, for this sort of forum, an ideal situation.
The library was sold, but it was sold for the benefit of Margaret College.
so everyone benefited that we chose as the front of the piece with his letterman inscribed copy of man and superman in which shaw wrote something like you will drive me mad with your craze for first editions take up a more useful hobby fight suicide
It took that challenge.
This may be an appropriate time to open up the panel to questions from the floor.
Rather than doing the traditional mic standing in the middle
the aisle with so many people who opted for more of a television style where the microphone will be handed to you.
So we will have roving individuals with microphones who will try and contact.
And I see a hand right over here.
We have a mic.
Is that George?
Yes.
And would you please identify yourself and give us some clue as to who you might be.
I'm George Lowry, Chairman of the Swan Galleries.
My question is, we've been talking about world-class collections.
A lot of people who are collectors are collectors who are not world class collectors.
What does the library, how the dealers deal with?
People who are not spending $500,000 a year, $500,000 a year for collection.
But at the end of 20 years, I've got a perfectly acceptable, interesting collection.
But libraries are inundated with people who've got perfectly respectable, interesting collections.
How do they handle those?
George, just before you give that mic away, would you define this as questions that wouldn't fall in the auction market at all?
Well, no.
No, it's not a question of the auction market.
It's simply a question.
We're talking about the relationship between dealers and libraries and collectors.
As I say, my concern, and the people that we deal with most of the time, people who do not have world-class, they may have a world-class work, but it's in with much of a very interesting,
books on a particular subject.
And you might go to Harvard, you might go to Brown, you might go to Columbia, and they say, it's a very nice collection, but these are all books that we already have.
Now what?
Well, I'm very conscious of the fact that my head of special collections is here, and I'm afraid that all kinds are going to wrap me up by the head if I don't say the right thing.
So far, it should be OK.
I think it's a hard question to answer in general.
I think in our case, indeed, we would look at what we already had.
We have certainly been known to recommend someone to go on to another institution which might find the collection very valuable.
If it's something that is not, quote, a world class collection, but nonetheless,
fit within our collecting scope, met a need, either in the curriculum on campus or to support research and fit in with what we do, we would probably welcome it.
I mean, we're not only interested in world-class collections.
But small collectors require just a look at this.
I beg your pardon?
Well, collectors require this remiss massaging, and our collectors are large.
Yes, but you know, sometimes they're worth it, because sometimes a small collection, I love the phrase, is this collection as magnet for other collections?
You never know.
I mean, one of the things, and one of the reasons that question is hard to answer in the abstract is, whose collection is this?
Is it a member of the university corporation and a major donor who has a collection that does fit within the scope, but you're interested in things beyond simply that immediate, yet you're interested in a long relationship?
There's a lot of factors that come into it.
If I can just say something that's been on my mind, but George's question really makes me want to get off the tip of my tongue.
We've been talking about special collections today, and this exists in a vacuum.
And I think certainly Merrilee and I and most of the colleagues who are here today would agree that special collections at an academic institution and
rare books and special collections at the Library of Congress is part of a larger whole.
So that when I say something about within scope, I'm looking at the rare books and materials in special collections really against how they, you know, support that
real deep foundation of scholarly sources that constitutes the six million volumes in the University of Chicago Library.
So one way of looking at George's question is, well, yes, but maybe, and I take your small collection, large collection, not to be numbers, but sort of price point.
And that might be a very valuable collection for the circulating collections.
Or that collection might contain copies of books
that could upgrade, replace, or provide complete copies of books that have gone missing or been used to death in our stack.
So I'd just like to sort of say that we need to think a bit more broadly when we're talking about collectors and libraries.
I'd like to add to that too, if I could, because I think this is an interesting question that many of us face.
The reactions almost go contrary to the size of the institution, that is larger, more formalized, or more established special collections within large university libraries, if they own those high spots, have greater difficulty with the selected high spot collection.
If the donor is not interested in allowing duplicates to move or want separate storage, a variety of considerations that sometimes come with these collections,
Whereas large articulated collections may be very much in need of the next rubber material, the secondary material, the support material, the minor authors, the less expensive pieces, the examples of fine print findings, the things that may have been unfortunately processed in the past but now we see as real objects where we do in fact need pristine copies to bring into special collections.
So while it might be tempting to say large institutions want large collections or big book collections, it may very well be that those are appropriate for the smaller institutions who lack them and could get much more mileage out of a copy of the Nuremberg Chronicle than an institution that already has both the German and the Latin edition.
Whereas large institutions may have a need for a broader, deeper base of material
I think that, could you identify yourself here?
My name is William Berkman.
I think that everyone touches on the word passion.
But then when we hear your animal is caught, no one approaches the subject.
And I think the fact is that America isn't a world of a range of marriages now.
America is a world of passion, concern, emotion,
And I think part of the difference between collectors and all of the other participants is that meeting of the fashion company.
The fact is the very best booksellers, auctioneers, and librarians have that passion, but oftentimes the institutions they represent seem to lack that passion and cause collectors to be concerned
Not that the relationship with individuals isn't good, but will that institution maintain it?
And when Mr. Lincoln talked about the Winter Museum, that long relationship gave him confidence to develop that passion.
It's hard without that kind of relationship to maintain it.
So part of the issue is how do you get that feeling, brother, that that passion is institutionalized?
Anyone has a panelist?
I agree.
We passionately agree.
I think that's probably an offense as a part of the panel.
And maybe we can explore that again in the afternoon after coffee break, because I think you are touching on something.
I see a hand.
There's a microphone.
We do stand up when you get the microphone.
You might as well turn on one of the Virginia Stores Society in Richmond.
And touching on that point, institutions like ours that our collections were largely built through philanthropy, not through purchase, the most important asset they have is their trustworthiness.
And I really think it's incumbent upon generation after generation.
We were looking at the deaccessioning project one time, and the greatest bar that we had to deaccessioning some of these items that might otherwise have been wonderful candidates is that a promise had been made to somebody 50 years, 100 years hence, or before,
saying that we would keep this in the collection forever.
Now, we don't make that kind of promise lightly now.
We're very careful about that.
But the promise has been made.
And I think unless your institution is willing to live up to those promises, then you probably have no reason, no right to be in the business of accepting people's collections.
Hi, I'm from Columbia.
One of the ways that large institutions can respond is by looking for people whose collections are not necessarily valuable, but are on the cutting edge of what can be collected.
That is pursuing subject areas, for example, that no one thought of collecting before.
marginalia, collecting certain assets of a particular printer, collecting subject areas or formats such as comic books that haven't entered into the high-end book market right now.
Sometimes the younger readers, collectors, people virtually just out of college, have most insightful viewpoints on how to develop and maintain these collections.
CD-ROMs are, of course, they have their preservation problems involved in the new format.
But there's all kinds of ways in which creative collecting is going on and which institutions that may have a lot of high spots may, on the other hand, be only too excited about
being able to receive collections of 19th century science books, for example, or early 20th century social science, collections that people have placed very little value on in the market today, but are extremely exciting and will be exciting in 20 or 30 or 40 or 50 years from now.
I would add that
something to that, which I think may become the work of librarians, which is we have that possibility as well of creating interest in a topic that may be responding to our own academic programs or our constituency.
I'm thinking, for example, of the work Margaret Taylor is doing at NYU in which he's identified at Downtown School of Authors.
who are living and very much alive, who are active in creating a center of interest for them at NYU Library, which has suddenly brought in a large wealth of material from either the individuals themselves or collectors around that area.
There's an example of still cutting edge collecting, but creating a focus or a space.
for people who share an interest in that topic, either as the creator, or the collector, or the audience for that.
That I think would tie into a change.
I would agree with that.
has developed in a way that really came people off the phone sometimes saying it sounds like a wonderful collection but the value is really more scholarly or historical than commercial but after saying it often enough and thinking about the collections people are describing you start to realize oftentimes it's true just because something is insalable by Sotheby's and so on Bill Reese doesn't believe that
It is not going to be of interest in trying to direct collections by that to institutions.
Well, I was just going to comment, too, on the portion, which is certainly a very important element in collecting.
It's also, I suppose you could say, passion.
We continue to use marriage analogy.
It's something that, you know, sometimes burns very hard at the beginning of a relationship.
That's the strong, steady, loyal devotion.
It's something that, you know, saves the course.
And I think when... Passion!
Well, there you are.
But I'm kind of looking at the office, you know, Martha's rattling off all the things you collect.
And I imagine you're passionate about all of them.
is it you know across the board passion all those things or is there one is there a more passionate battle than another or it's just like uh the star system that variable life but once you have a great once you have a marriage as a lifelong partner it should be a passion should increase not
I think one of the arcs about all this on both sides is that, again, institutions like my own, certainly in the Library of Congress,
we work with with each passionate collector and as a collective company they're joining what you might say is a great stream of collections put there by others who are passionate for them and i think the real art is to work with each director and each collector and respond to their great loss they have for their material and yet at the same time not
Have them understand that they may be one of several passionate people that the institution has relationships with.
And you can't, it's a little different I think perhaps than the collectors who may be free to go every moment of this waking time to one area or group of areas.
My name is Gordon Pfeiffer, I'm a collector.
I think the panel is making a mistake when they say they should not bring collectors together.
I mean obviously clubs are able to do that, but I think library also have a function of doing that, and it's not what gives you more pleasure than you find a competitor of mine when working with you, they might find something that he already has underneath the right person.
And I guess what's fun finding out what EFA has as I would if I had it for myself.
So you're making a mistake.
Do you live anywhere near Providence?
I live very near literature.
There's a mic over here.
I was back there.
Okay, stand up when you got the mic.
Is that Ben?
Yeah, hi Mark.
My name is Ben Kinmon and I just wanted to bring up one point which hasn't really been discussed so far, which is the way in which, in fact, collectors can also end libraries and can affect the historiography of a given field.
And I particularly think about George Thompson in the 17th century in England and his famous collection of tracts and broadsides.
and newspapers, which are now in the British Museum, and how the development of social history and other historians really couldn't have occurred without this collection sort of sitting there lately.
And the British Library for three and a half centuries
And I just wondered that one of the other things that I find very valuable about collectors and relationships with libraries, with these more esoteric or unusual subjects, is when the libraries are unable to issue a bibliography, a subject bibliography about a given field.
And I wondered, and I think in terms of gastronomy, of course, with Cagle's productions at the Lilley Library, where we finally have some bibliographies that are not just short-listing productions by proper correlations for gastronomy.
And I wondered whether or not, for the librarians in particular, whether or not they could talk about the difficulty or the reason why there simply aren't more subject to bibliographies being issued by the libraries, which would really be a serious and important contribution to the field when they bring in these collections.
If the Thompson catalogs hadn't been issued by the British Library in the 19th century or late 19th century, it wouldn't have been as useful and it wouldn't have affected his geography the way that it had.
The Kegel catalogs are the same thing with the field of gastronomy.
And I certainly often feel like when it's just wonderful, small, maybe not so valuable, but very focused collections to go to libraries, it would be wonderful if the bibliography would be properly written and really be a contribution to the field.
And I wanted if somebody could speak about that.
I think there are several reasons for that.
One of the great questions I know about our staff, I think in Special Collections, is the demand today on a daily basis just to offer service, develop the collection,
deal with the digital projects, raise money.
We were talking a little earlier today about the fact that there are people now who are reluctant to become curators because of the expectation that you're going to have to raise money and they don't find that congenial and don't spend their time doing that.
The time that is available in libraries for people to do scholarship
has really become a problem um the other issue i think well there's two words is one is um where the next generation of verbal librarians are coming from this is this is an area where we really need scholars and people with content knowledge and it is a question as to whether people are going to enter the profession who have the kind of knowledge to do the scholarly bibliography that um were important
And another factor I think is that many of these projects were supported by grant funding, some of it from places like NEH, others from private funds and from private foundations.
And as I said earlier, that money has dried up.
And so while you could argue that it's something that our institutions support,
through the willingness to devote staff to that, in fact, is very difficult to keep the place running these days, much less pull someone off to devote that kind of time of doing it.
Terry, do you have the mic?
Yes.
It's an honor.
Thank you.
I'm Terry Ballinger from the University of Virginia.
I attended my first wear book conference in 1974, and I realized there are many people in this room that if I play this game with, I'm going to lose.
But I began being struck.
I think it was the Harvard conference in the early 90s celebrating the 50th anniversary of the
Hoden Library, at the extent to which there's an obligatory statement at the beginning of the conference that said, well, this is about to change, you know, because of the electronic arrangements, and then it wasn't discussed again for the rest of the day.
And it seems to me that the topic that is before us more important than any other at a meeting like this at a time like this is what's going to happen over the next 25 years with all those books that no one wants.
and that has been the stuff of our research libraries for a long time, but which will be thought to be unnecessary by a very large number of the libraries that are unhappy owners of them at the moment.